[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: dead economists were gathered to watch, I wondered. Just then, the title flashed on the screen.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene in the unseen. Today's episode is about zombie firms and creative
[Amit Varma]: destruction. What are zombie firms, you ask? They are the living dead of the business world,
[Amit Varma]: firms that should have shut down but are kept alive, sometimes by zombie banks. Air India is
[Amit Varma]: one example and Jet Airways, which shut down recently, could have been another one. My guest
[Amit Varma]: today is the economist Ajay Shah, who is a zombie hunter of sorts, passionate in his belief that
[Amit Varma]: zombie firms are bad for the economy and for common citizens like you and me, and that the
[Amit Varma]: state should not allow this horror movie to continue. Before he explains why, though, let's
[Amit Varma]: take a quick commercial break. This episode of the scene in the unseen is brought to you by Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audiobook platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app.
[Amit Varma]: They have thousands of audiobooks that you can listen to on your mobile, including hundreds in
[Amit Varma]: local languages like Hindi and Marathi, and unlimited monthly subscription costs only
[Amit Varma]: Rs 2.99 per month. And you can also get a 30-day free trial if you hop on over to
[Amit Varma]: storytel.com slash IBM. I actually use Storytel myself regularly. So as long as they sponsor the
[Amit Varma]: show, I'm going to recommend one book a week that I love. The book I want to recommend today is
[Amit Varma]: called Hayek by Iman Butler. Frederick Hayek is one of the most important thinkers of the 20th
[Amit Varma]: century, and someone who's had a great influence on me. But this is not a book by him, but a brief
[Amit Varma]: introduction to his life and his thinking by an outstanding author called Iman Butler. So check
[Amit Varma]: it out on Storytel. And remember, you get a 30 day free trial only at Storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: Ajay, welcome to the scene in the unseen. My pleasure to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Ajay, I've been reading you and I've admired your work for many, many years,
[Amit Varma]: almost since the start of the millennium. Tell my listeners a little bit more about you. Like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how did you become an economist? What was what's your journey been like?
[Guest]: Um, I had the good fortune that I was brought up in a house with 6000 books,
[Guest]: and my father was an economist. So in a way, I've been exposed to these things all along.
[Guest]: I studied aeronautical engineering at IIT Bombay. And then I jumped into a PhD in economics.
[Guest]: After moving back to India, I worked at the Center for Monitoring Indian Economy,
[Guest]: the CMIE. I worked at the Indira Gandhi Institute for Development Research.
[Guest]: This is a university near Bombay. And I was then in the Ministry of Finance in Delhi.
[Guest]: After that, I have been at the National Institute for Public Finance and Policy,
[Guest]: NIPFP in Delhi. So that's my life trajectory. All through my work, I've basically been curious
[Guest]: about the world, both in terms of understanding how things are, and in terms of what public
[Guest]: policy can do to make it different. And when you start thinking about public policy, it inevitably
[Guest]: takes one away from simple economics, because a lot of public policy is really public management,
[Guest]: it's public administration, it is law, and of course, it is politics. So I've been exposed
[Guest]: into that world. I've had the good fortune of being involved in many of the big and exciting
[Guest]: policy projects of the last 25 years. These included the early development of the equity
[Guest]: market, the reforms of building SEBI and NSE, the new pension system. Then I was part of the
[Guest]: early thinking on the goods and services tax. I was part of the Financial Sector Legislative
[Guest]: Reforms Commission, which did a full clean write of Indian financial law. I was part of the
[Guest]: bankruptcy process. I was a member of the committee that drafted the Indian Bankruptcy Code. And I
[Guest]: was part of the movement of the Reserve Bank of India, towards inflation targeting, and so on.
[Guest]: So I've had the good fortune of being at the early ideas stages of some of these important projects.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I noticed that you were very fortunate in the same way that I was that I
[Amit Varma]: also grew up in a house full of books. And that's where I kind of got hooked on to reading and then
[Amit Varma]: you just get curious about the world. And that's an incredible habit. So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: what were your early influences in terms of like, you said you were in a house with about
[Amit Varma]: 6000 books. So, and your dad was an economist, but I'm presuming they weren't all books of
[Guest]: economics. There would have been all kinds of books. My father was a 19th century intellectual,
[Guest]: okay, where it was not a narrow economics view. It was everything. It was history,
[Guest]: it was politics, it was philosophy, it was culture, it was religion, it was everything. So
[Guest]: I always think of myself as a visitor to this century, from the 20th century, for me,
[Guest]: the great experience of my mind is the thought process of the 20th century. So if you look at
[Guest]: the 20th century, starting from the collapse of the first globalization in 1914, then you play
[Guest]: the arc through the First World War, the Great Depression, the Second World War, the collapse of
[Guest]: colonial empires, the Cold War, the collapse of communism, the rise of liberal economics and
[Guest]: globalization, and then its recent minor hiccups. In my mind, this is the story that this is my
[Guest]: natural locale. I understand this world. I have spent my whole life studying this world. I think
[Guest]: I have some intuition into how things have happened. And I think that's a useful thing to
[Guest]: have in this century, where many people don't quite remember those interconnections and have
[Guest]: not lived those experiences. So as a reader of books, I always say that a person lives only one
[Guest]: life. But when you read books, you can experience 1000s of lives. So I feel I have pulled together
[Guest]: some knowledge and experience from 1000s of people of the 20th century.
[Amit Varma]: And who were the early thinkers or what were the books that had a big influence on you earlier?
[Amit Varma]: Like if I had to ask you to name a couple of books, which changed the way you think about
[Amit Varma]: the world? It's a question I often ask people.
[Guest]: This is going to be an embarrassment. But today, the book that looms large in my mind is a book
[Guest]: that I only read about six or seven years ago. And this is the book Seeing Like a State by James C.
[Guest]: Scott. I just think of that book as one of the most important influences in how I think about
[Guest]: the world today. And sadly, I got to it only seven years ago.
[Guest]: How did it change the way you looked at the world?
[Guest]: It made me much more cautious. So I think I have suffered from an engineering disease.
[Guest]: And a willingness to design the world too much. And I think the book slapped me around
[Guest]: and made me much more careful and much more cautious. It also helped that along the way,
[Guest]: I was gaining more experience and I was learning how things go horribly wrong
[Guest]: through more practical experiences. But I think that James Scott has helped me
[Guest]: be far more careful and far more grounded in respecting the complexities of the world,
[Guest]: in underlining how little we know. We the thinkers about public policy
[Guest]: are actually far less knowledgeable and far less confident in what we do. So this is the sort of
[Guest]: caution and change in worldview that James C. Scott has helped me see.
[Guest]: Maybe it was brewing all along, but the book just was like a vision for me when I read it.
[Amit Varma]: And is that sort of epistemic humility, something that is very uncommon in the
[Amit Varma]: fields that you worked in? Because I imagine that people in government always do imagine that they
[Guest]: can, you know, see themselves as designers of sorts. So I think of it as two parts.
[Guest]: First, right after independence, there was unabashedly a period of modernism.
[Guest]: There was this idea of a developmental state, the government was going to build steel mills,
[Guest]: you know, there was central planning raged on a large scale that the governments were quite
[Guest]: comfortable and quite arrogant in reshaping the world. By the late 70s and early 80s, when
[Guest]: the economic policy philosophy started shifting into a more market-led vision of the world,
[Guest]: I think that has subsided. But even then, I think that we in India would do better
[Guest]: by crossing the river, by feeling the stones, making small moves, learning from experience,
[Guest]: always being humble, listening to the world, listening to the data, and changing our mind as
[Amit Varma]: we go along. Getting to sort of the topic at hand, I mean, the larger topic, of course,
[Amit Varma]: is the existence and the danger of zombie firms and the value of creative destruction.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, at the time that we are recording this, we are recording this on
[Amit Varma]: April 22. And what is looming in front of me, as I think of these things is obviously the
[Amit Varma]: downfall of jet, where in a sense, obviously, I'm glad it's gone, because a lot of the voices
[Amit Varma]: for keeping it alive, I mean, for the government to keep it alive would really have been, you know,
[Amit Varma]: privatizing profits, socializing losses. And that's absolutely the worst for, you know,
[Amit Varma]: any supporter of free markets can hope for. Tell me a bit about jet, like what exactly happened
[Guest]: there? Why did it fail? What was the journey? So, I've thought a lot about the Indian airline
[Guest]: industry. And in my mind, one important root cause of the trouble, which I think has not been
[Guest]: adequately appreciated, is the presence of Air India that was making losses. So, here is the
[Guest]: key intuition. So, just to make up an example, suppose there is an Air India that has 20%
[Guest]: market share. So, not a dominant player, but big enough to matter to the price. And suppose
[Guest]: Air India systematically loses money, which means that the taxpayer is topping up Air India every
[Guest]: year. But Air India is systematically charging an affair that is not enough for Air India to make
[Guest]: money. And there is an artificial injection of resources from the taxpayer. What that does is,
[Guest]: it really puts a crimp on the profits of every other firm. So, if I'm a rival airline, I'm unable
[Guest]: to charge slightly higher prices, because Air India is here charging relatively lower prices.
[Guest]: So, these kinds of firms, firms like Air India have a technical name. They're called zombie
[Guest]: firms. So, the phrase zombie is supposed to bring to your mind the living dead. I have a funny story
[Guest]: about this. Once I was part of a government committee where the phrase zombie banks was used.
[Guest]: So, now the word zombie firms, zombie banks is a technical phrase. It's a term of art
[Guest]: in economics literature. But there was a chairman of a public sector bank who was hugely offended
[Guest]: because he took this phrase to be a slur and there was an energetic fight where he asked for the
[Guest]: deletion of the word zombie banks from all over the report. So, zombie firms, zombie banks, these
[Guest]: are technical terms in economics. So, this is a firm that, you know, by right would not exist in
[Guest]: any reasonable world, but is being artificially kept alive on life support either by taxpayers
[Guest]: or by banks, or by somebody, but really, it's not a viable firm. So, in our…
[Amit Varma]: And it need not always be a public sector firm.
[Guest]: And it doesn't have to be a public sector firm. So, for example, in Japan, the zombie
[Guest]: banks were keeping zombie firms alive. And both the banks and the firms were purely private.
[Guest]: So, there was an entire ecosystem of zombies of the living dead walking around the landscape.
[Guest]: These are firms that are not profitable, they're not viable. But the interesting insight is that
[Guest]: if you have one guy with a 20% market share, who's being artificially kept alive, either by banks
[Guest]: or by taxpayers, then that actually contaminates the health of the entire industry. The remaining
[Guest]: 80% of the industry will not be healthy because they will not be able to charge suitable prices.
[Guest]: So, then the disease tends to spread. So, once you get one zombie firm, you will get others,
[Guest]: then there'll be a second firm, there'll be a third firm. So, when you look back at the
[Guest]: failures of some of the other airlines in India, the counterfactual I would like to
[Guest]: play in my head is, what if Air India had actually been profitable? What if Air India
[Guest]: had been charging a little more for its tickets? What if Air India had been privatized? Okay, so,
[Guest]: people often think that if Air India was privatized, that would mean more competition
[Guest]: for private firms. But I would also say, it would probably mean somewhat higher ticket prices. And
[Guest]: that would prop up the profitability of all the other Indian airlines. So, this is a part of what
[Guest]: led to the failure of Jet. It was just too many years of having to compete with Air India.
[Amit Varma]: Let me cite an illustration from one of your pieces and all the pieces I refer to in this will
[Amit Varma]: be linked in the episode page in the show notes, where you illustrated this by saying that imagine
[Amit Varma]: that the ticket price which the market is willing to pay is 100 rupees, but Air India is so inefficient
[Amit Varma]: that it cannot price it at less than 110 bucks. So, then the taxpayer or the banks or whoever
[Amit Varma]: basically gives Air India 11 bucks, so they can charge 99 rupees. And what that does is because
[Amit Varma]: Air India is functioning at 99 rupees subsidized by us or other zombie banks or whatever, is that
[Amit Varma]: the likes of Jet and Indigo cannot then charge 102, 101 or even 100, they have to compete at that
[Amit Varma]: level. And the investments that they would have made with their profits and you know, getting
[Amit Varma]: more fleet, you know, just expanding overall is something that they can't do, they're barely
[Guest]: struggling to get even. And now let me add to that. So, let's imagine a counterfactual, where
[Guest]: Air India had exited the market. Okay, so just suppose we managed to shut down Air India. Many
[Guest]: things would happen. So far, we've talked about the pricing side. But also many pilots would then
[Guest]: lose their jobs in Air India. The supply of pilots would go up, the prices of pilots would go down,
[Guest]: all remaining airlines, all surviving airlines would benefit because pilots would be cheaper.
[Guest]: Landing slots would become available. Real estate at airports and near airports would become
[Guest]: available. Capital would become available because for many investors and banks, there are limits on
[Guest]: the amount of investment you can do in one industry. And by the time you've given loans to
[Guest]: Air India, you've choked up your industry concentration limits. And there would probably
[Guest]: be space on the balance sheets of banks that is freed up once Air India exits. So, we should see
[Guest]: the exit of a firm as playing on these two sides. One is, it improves the pricing power of the
[Guest]: survivors. The second, it improves the cost function of the survivors. The survivors are able
[Guest]: to buy their inputs at a slightly lower price. And put these two things together, you get a little
[Guest]: bit of a bump in the profitability. And that actually could have made quite a difference for
[Amit Varma]: some of the airlines that blew up along the way. Right. And you know, from another of your posts,
[Amit Varma]: there's a very interesting quote where you kind of illustrate this. So I'll just quote that,
[Amit Varma]: it's useful to focus on the plane. Ultimately, what is required in the economy is that a plane
[Amit Varma]: has to fly from Bombay to Nagpur. Earlier, that plane was leased or owned by Jet Airways. An
[Amit Varma]: efficient financial system is one where leasing companies shift leased planes from Jet Airways
[Amit Varma]: to other airlines, and the bankruptcy process sells of the own planes or own planes. As long
[Amit Varma]: as the plane flies, it does not matter what logo is painted on a stale stop code. And you have
[Amit Varma]: another post like this was in a piece and you have another post on your early blog, where you sort
[Amit Varma]: of illustrate this by talking about the cost of an idle plane for a single day. And you point out,
[Amit Varma]: you know how, for example, an efficient hypothetical dictator would make sure that every plane ran
[Amit Varma]: every day because he has to. But the way and the market would do the same thing if it was allowed
[Amit Varma]: to function properly, but because of the way our system is messed up, that doesn't happen. And
[Amit Varma]: Kingfisher actually had planes lying idle for an entire year at a phenomenal opportunity cost.
[Guest]: So actually, I started thinking about this field when I saw the Kingfisher planes. It just breaks
[Guest]: my heart to see those assets sitting on an airfield. What a waste. Okay. It is just a tragedy
[Guest]: for society when that asset is sitting there and it's not being used. And that's our failure as
[Guest]: society. So as you said a moment ago, it doesn't matter what colors are painted on the plane. You
[Guest]: want the damn plane to fly. So in economics, we always use this hypothetical concept of an
[Guest]: omniscient dictator who knows how to allocate resources. Okay. Please note, no economist
[Guest]: advocates dictatorship. This is just, and no dictator is omniscient. This is just an intellectual
[Guest]: device that if you could think efficiently and use all assets and all labor of the country,
[Guest]: well, then that's like a hypothetical benchmark. And we always would like to build a society that
[Guest]: is able to use resources properly. So it struck me as a glaring failure when there were planes
[Guest]: belonging to Kingfisher airlines, which were just sitting idle. That is failure. And we should ask
[Guest]: ourselves, how can we organize society so that this doesn't happen? It should just take a few
[Guest]: days for a leasing company to switch a plane from one airline to another airline for a painting job
[Guest]: to be done for new colors to be painted on the plane. And then you're back to business. Finally,
[Guest]: what is going on? As you mentioned a moment ago, there's a plane, there's a pilot, there is Bombay,
[Guest]: there is Nagpur, there's a passenger. It doesn't matter. What is the firm? What is the airline?
[Guest]: What are the colors? Okay. The same pilot will get a job in that new airline and you're done.
[Guest]: You just want to get rid of that one ephemeral construct called an airline and hand over that
[Guest]: asset, that pilot to a different ephemeral construct called another airline. And that's
[Guest]: our job as society. Can we create the institutional arrangements through which
[Guest]: these things can be done swiftly? And then we are done. Then we don't need to get so stuck
[Guest]: up about the bankruptcy of jet airways. It is always sad when an organization dies.
[Guest]: Okay. So for all of us, we've been part of teams. We've been part of organizations.
[Guest]: We love organizational capital. We love to build organizations. And I'll come back to that in a
[Guest]: moment surrounding the discussion on bankruptcy. But as society firms are ephemeral, we should use
[Amit Varma]: assets well. So, you know, when you say that, that those assets should immediately have been
[Amit Varma]: put to better use and would have been within a few days, you know, some listeners might
[Amit Varma]: immediately imagine as Indians tend to look at the government for solutions,
[Amit Varma]: let's say how the government should do that the government should, blah, blah, blah. But
[Amit Varma]: what really happens is that when you say society wants to society wants that society acts through
[Amit Varma]: markets, markets are the mechanism through which we fulfill each other's needs in society.
[Amit Varma]: And typically, the market process would lead to that happening, you know, where the planes
[Amit Varma]: idle for maybe a week and they repainted and then they're flying and everything's back to normal.
[Amit Varma]: Explain to me how that process would work out. And explain to me what are the impediments in
[Amit Varma]: its way that you know, what's wrong with the system? Why isn't that happening?
[Guest]: So I share what you said a moment ago 100% that when we say society, we're looking for
[Guest]: the working of markets. Okay, we are a self organizing system. People deal with each other
[Guest]: with self interest and profit motives. And what we're looking for is the rules of the game through
[Guest]: which all these nice things will happen. And that takes us to institutions and law.
[Guest]: So let's think of the pieces of this puzzle. The first piece of the puzzle is that I'm very happy
[Guest]: that a lot of planes are leased and not bought. Okay, because it's much easier to move a leased
[Guest]: plane from one airline to another. Okay, so the airline is supposed to regularly make payments
[Guest]: to the leasing company. And when that doesn't happen, the leasing company yanks the plane,
[Guest]: and that plane is then available for rent to give it to somebody else. And so that same plane
[Guest]: sitting in Nagpur will be captured from the control of one airline. And the leasing company will
[Guest]: probably make phone calls to all the airlines and saying, do you want this asset? It's lying
[Guest]: right there. Okay, so that's one part of it that leasing is a very good thing. The second important
[Guest]: thing is to think of bankruptcy. Okay, so the way to think of the bankruptcy process is like this.
[Guest]: Imagine there is a company with, say, 100 rupees of assets, out of which there is 30 rupees of
[Guest]: equity and 70 rupees of debt. And this company gets into trouble and it is not able to pay either
[Guest]: its creditors or its employees or something. So for whatever reason, the company gets into
[Guest]: trouble. Now what should happen is the bankruptcy process. Conceptually, what happens in the
[Guest]: bankruptcy process is we say to a new buyer that I'm willing to write off all the debt of the
[Guest]: company. So it's 30-70, 30 rupees of equity, 70 rupees of debt. Imagine what the bankruptcy
[Guest]: process does is it says, look, the 70 is gone. Okay, so you as a buyer, I'm giving you a clean
[Guest]: slate. I'm giving you an all equity company of just the assets of the company and no debt. So
[Guest]: you're not carrying any baggage. That's the glory of the bankruptcy process. That's the beauty of
[Guest]: the bankruptcy process that you get a clean slate. It's not like the bad old days where the buyer of
[Guest]: a company had to take over all the debt that came with the company. Here, the buyer gets a clean
[Guest]: slate. He gets a start. Now, suppose the price, the highest bidder says the price I'm willing to
[Guest]: pay is 29. Okay. Then the lenders who have control of the bankruptcy process will think, you know,
[Guest]: what's the point? I might as well just liquidate the assets of the company and I'm not really
[Guest]: getting much. But if the bidder sees some value in the organization, in the people,
[Guest]: in the processes, in the capabilities of the organization, then he probably bid 40,
[Guest]: probably bid 50. And the debtors will take whatever little money they can get that comes in
[Guest]: and walk away. So that's the bankruptcy process. Can we run this quickly? Can we do this literally
[Guest]: within weeks? It should not be complicated. It should not take forever. Okay. So in India,
[Guest]: these things go on for years and years. Our puzzle in public policy is how do we make this happen
[Guest]: quickly? So we created a new bankruptcy law in May, 2016, and we're still in the early stages
[Guest]: of figuring this out. But really in an ideal world, that's what you want to happen. That
[Guest]: we like Jet Airways as an organization. It had some genuine capabilities. So somebody should
[Guest]: be willing to pay for it. It had some landing slots. It had some very attractive real estate.
[Guest]: It had some people. It had some systems. It had some capabilities. So imagine you put it up for
[Guest]: auction in the bankruptcy process. Then somebody would pay for it and would pay a good price.
[Guest]: And all the debt would get written off and you start over. And that's the glory of bankruptcy.
[Guest]: Look around the world. Airlines go bankrupt all the time. It's not new. It's not unusual.
[Guest]: Telecom companies go bankrupt all the time. It's not new. So the point is, we should not allow
[Guest]: these things to become long, slow, painful affairs. We should have the institutional
[Guest]: arrangements to do these things quickly. So the assets will be used. So the people will be used.
[Guest]: So the organizational capital will be used. But you know what, if nobody feels there is
[Guest]: organizational capability of value inside this company, then there won't really be interesting
[Guest]: bids. And then, yes, the company deserves to just be cut up into some pieces and sold off that.
[Guest]: You sell some land, you sell some planes, and for the rest, the company ceases to exist.
[Guest]: And then we should be unsentimental about it. Okay, we tried. It didn't work. Move on. Let's
[Guest]: give the parts back to society and let's move on to something new.
[Amit Varma]: So where did the IBC, like we do have, you know, an IBC, Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
[Amit Varma]: as you pointed out, where did it fail in this instance?
[Guest]: The IBC is still a work in progress. So many of the steps that I've described are an idealized
[Guest]: depiction of what a bankruptcy process should be. Many pieces of the IBC are not yet in place. We
[Guest]: don't quite have the ability to rapidly set up the committee of creditors, rapidly assemble the
[Guest]: information, rapidly do an auction, have a tribunal that will look effectively at these
[Guest]: issues without introducing delays, without making mistakes, and so on. So this is still work in
[Guest]: progress, and we're not there. But I'm just on an idealized world that that's how we should be
[Guest]: thinking about this. By the way, as you would have read one of my articles, I think the right
[Guest]: answer for Air India, for the government, is to use the bankruptcy code. Yeah, that's what I was
[Guest]: coming to. Because that's where you wipe the debts clean. The only way in India, where you can wipe
[Amit Varma]: the debts clean and start over is IBC. So I wanted to break that down for me. Now, in your specific
[Amit Varma]: piece, for example, you gave the instance of say that there is a zombie firm, and it has say 200
[Amit Varma]: rupees in debt. And the most anybody is willing to pay for it is 50 rupees. But nobody will do
[Amit Varma]: that because they pay 50 rupees and they're stuck with 200 rupees of debt. So one option is where
[Amit Varma]: the government covers the debt. So you have an auction where the winning prize is a negative bid
[Amit Varma]: in this case 150. So the government covers 200, the other 50 goes into covering that and then
[Amit Varma]: you do whoever bids for it has a firm with no debts, but that of course, and the taxpayer is
[Amit Varma]: taking that burden, but it's a one time fiscal burden and doesn't keep repeating. Is that the
[Amit Varma]: kind of scenario that would work for Air India? Well, it would involve the use of taxpayer money,
[Guest]: and I don't see why. So what's the other option? The other option is to put Air India into the
[Guest]: bankruptcy process. So imagine that one of the banks, one of the public sector banks will have
[Guest]: a payment that does not come on time from Air India. So imagine the taxpayer stops putting
[Guest]: money into Air India. Air India fails to pay either an employee or a creditor, or a bank,
[Guest]: and then any of these characters can go to the NCLT and initiate the bankruptcy process.
[Amit Varma]: As it turns out, as it turns out, right.
[Guest]: And what the bankruptcy process does is precisely this. It takes Air India, it puts it up for sale,
[Guest]: and it offers the buyer a clean slate. It says all your debts are wiped off. And whatever that
[Guest]: buyer puts up the highest bidder puts up, that's the money that goes to the creditors,
[Guest]: it may be less than the full debt that was owed to them, but that's okay.
[Amit Varma]: So that's given in a pro rata kind?
[Guest]: Yeah, there is a procedure for allocating. And in the end, you get a clean, unencumbered firm
[Guest]: with some assets, with some capabilities, with some software, with some people,
[Guest]: with some management systems, or maybe these organizational capabilities actually don't exist.
[Guest]: And nobody really comes up with a half plausible bid for Air India. In this case, it goes to
[Guest]: liquidation, please sell Air India building, please sell the planes, please sell the real
[Guest]: estate at all the airport counters, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Right. You've spoken and you had an article on the IBC as a means of privatization,
[Amit Varma]: which would basically be this, you get rid of a zombie firm in this manner.
[Amit Varma]: So the question here is that, you know, number one, there are obviously interest groups,
[Amit Varma]: which would be against this in the political economy, which stop these kinds of reforms
[Amit Varma]: from happening. And number two, there might be a mindset problem where, you know, people think of
[Amit Varma]: the economy in a particular sort of central planning way that we have to keep these firms
[Amit Varma]: alive. And you have zombie banks keeping zombie firms alive, as you described, you know, which
[Amit Varma]: of these is more of an issue here?
[Guest]: So I think the second one, because we in India have not had experience with the bankruptcy code,
[Guest]: we're used to firms that just live and live and live. And we've developed this worldview that
[Guest]: a firm essentially lives forever. And I would just like to plead with all of us that yes,
[Guest]: there is something great in the organizational capabilities of many firms, but that doesn't
[Guest]: mean all firms have great organizational capabilities. And just like the creation of
[Guest]: the creation of new firms is very important, the destruction of old firms is also very important.
[Guest]: And as a society, we have to move on. A firm is nothing but a collection of people
[Guest]: and capital that comes together. And if it doesn't work, then we should just move on
[Guest]: because that same capital, those same people will do other things. Okay. Finally, a pilot
[Guest]: is going to fly planes. Finally, the Indian passenger will fly from Bombay to Nagpur.
[Guest]: So, you know, in the end, it all evens itself out. We don't have to be so stuck on the idea
[Guest]: that there will always be an Air India and there will always be a Jet Airways. Maybe these are not
[Guest]: the right organizations to have done these things, or maybe they are. I'm not here to prejudge
[Guest]: whether there is organizational capability or not, but that's for the bankruptcy process to decide.
[Guest]: If there are buyers who feel that there is organizational capability in Jet Airways,
[Guest]: they'll put up a price for it. And if there isn't, then we should feel a little bit of sadness,
[Guest]: but we should move on. And the great economist Joseph Schumpeter taught us
[Guest]: this whole message about creative destruction, that the glory of the market economy lies in
[Guest]: that ceaseless churning where new firms are born all the time and old firms die all the time.
[Guest]: And that's what keeps a market economy energetic. That's what keeps a market economy honest.
[Guest]: And I feel we in India have somehow got into this notion that every firm is somewhat like a
[Guest]: government job, that I'll have the job forever, the firm will be there forever. And I think that
[Guest]: we would all be better off being more equanimous about it, that look, these things happen,
[Guest]: they come and go. I would like to narrate two stories in this regard. The first of them is
[Guest]: the malls of India. So as an economist, I suffer from two problems. The first is that I rarely get
[Guest]: to visit malls. And the second is that when I visit malls each time, my heart overflows with joy
[Guest]: because I see how much change there is between one month and the next month. You walk in any
[Guest]: mall in India, there is this constant churn. There will be a new outlet where there was something
[Guest]: completely different. People move on. People try something if it works great. If it doesn't,
[Guest]: they move on. There's that dynamism. Among small firms in India, we know that dynamism.
[Guest]: So similarly, you would have heard of the restaurant business in India. People put in a
[Guest]: lot of capital thinking it's going to work for a year. So you do your entire business plan,
[Guest]: thinking at the end of the year, people will be tired of this restaurant and odds are,
[Guest]: I'll have to shut it down and move on and do something new. That's the dynamism.
[Guest]: Here is a story originally written by my colleague, Ela Patnaik. She did this in the
[Guest]: Indian Express some years ago. You will remember a time when there were these STD, ISD, PCOs all
[Guest]: over the country. So all over the country, we would travel and then we would find our way
[Guest]: to some STD booth and we would make a call home. When mobile phones first came, we still used those
[Guest]: STD, PCOs because roaming was extremely expensive with your mobile phone. I believe that at the
[Guest]: peak, there were more than a million of these PCOs and each of them probably had one, two,
[Guest]: three people participating in the production. So probably a labor force of multi-million people
[Guest]: was producing these STD, ISD, PCOs. And then one fine day, the roaming cost of cell phones went to
[Guest]: zero. And this entire industry vanished in the blink of an eye. This is an industry vastly bigger
[Guest]: than the employees of Jet Airways. In the blink of an eye, all these people lost their jobs and
[Guest]: they moved on. They went and did other things. And cyber cafes for that matter. Similarly,
[Guest]: cyber cafes sprang up and cyber cafes vanished. And this is the glory of a market economy.
[Guest]: That at each point in time, entrepreneurs look at the world, firms look at the world,
[Guest]: they try to figure out how can I serve the customer? And there is a way of serving the
[Guest]: customer and then the world changes. Preference has changed, technology changes. And we should
[Guest]: be unsentimental about firm creation and firm destruction.
[Amit Varma]: Another example that comes to mind is there used to be an old saying right up to the end of the
[Amit Varma]: 90s, a Japanese saying, I think, that if you want to make a man bankrupt, give him a camera.
[Amit Varma]: Because film was so expensive. And now you don't find, you know, Kodak film developing
[Guest]: thingies anymore.
[Guest]: On every street in India, we would have had one little shop, which is a studio and they would
[Amit Varma]: develop your film and today they're all gone.
[Amit Varma]: Except maybe for passport photos, small whatever. And you know, part of this is again that Indian
[Amit Varma]: mentality like earlier in this conversation when you were talking about how if Air India was to
[Amit Varma]: shut down, other airlines would be able to buy pilots cheaper. And I thought a lot of my listeners
[Amit Varma]: would react to that by saying, oh, what about the poor pilots? They're going to get paid less.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, those same voices spring up now and say, what about the poor jet employees?
[Amit Varma]: There are, you know, whatever thousands of employees, what are they going to do?
[Amit Varma]: And that's the scene effect. And, you know, like the show is, of course, called the scene
[Amit Varma]: in the unseen. And the unseen effect is that, look, there is value created in the economy and
[Guest]: all of these people eventually get absorbed.
[Guest]: And see, you can't have it only one way. When markets work and there was a shortage of pilots,
[Guest]: the price of pilots went up. And at that point, pilots didn't complain.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Guest]: Okay. But it's the same process that over the years, there'll be more and more young people
[Guest]: who will earn their wings and there will be supply of pilots and that will impact on the price. So
[Guest]: once we get used to the idea that supply and demand determines the price, then we just respect
[Guest]: that vast impersonal machine of the market and it will have its own ups and downs for each of us.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I also want to talk a bit about the price system and how that affects zombie firms and
[Amit Varma]: how that's, you know, how a system where you don't let zombie firms die prolongs downturns.
[Unknown]: But we'll take a quick commercial break.
[Unknown]: So,
[Unknown]: they talk about the challenges faced by the 470 million plus children in India.
[Unknown]: On What A Player, Akash Mehta and Siddharth Dedeja are joined by sportswriter Vivek Krishnan.
[Unknown]: They talk about why Bangalore should be in the top four spots and a lot more.
[Unknown]: On Dating is Garbage, three IBM dudes discuss their dating lives with Janam and share their
[Unknown]: stories around love, friendship and sex. On Simplified, we have the founder of Kranti
[Unknown]: Art Theory, Romario Rodriguez. He joins Chuck in Narendra as they talk about talent management
[Unknown]: and integrating various art genres. On Football Twirl, the boys are back to discuss last game
[Unknown]: week's EPL results and the heated battle for top four placement. On Gol Gappa, model turned
[Unknown]: actress Aditi Govindrikar joins Tripti where she talks about motherhood, practicing psychology
[Unknown]: and her career as a model. And with that, let's move on with your shows.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with the economist Ajay Shah about
[Amit Varma]: zombie firms. You should really make a horror film on this. If Bollywood kind of took this up,
[Amit Varma]: that would be great. You know, part of your analysis of zombie firms and all the pieces
[Amit Varma]: that you've written on it involves the state, the government not understanding how prices work
[Amit Varma]: fundamentally. Tell me a little bit about that. I mean, I've had episodes in the past on how
[Amit Varma]: damaging price controls and all of that. Just take me through.
[Guest]: So I feel that a child can understand the price system. And yet, so many people seem to not
[Guest]: particularly think about the price system. It's it's just it's a great recipe for understanding
[Guest]: the world. It's like an invisible formula that is running the world. And it's a secret that only a
[Guest]: few people have. So let me let me talk a bit about how some of these things work. And at once,
[Guest]: these are trivial observations. And yet they're interesting and powerful observations. So let's
[Guest]: start at planes once again. So we had some of these Boeing 737 MAX planes being grounded because
[Guest]: of safety concerns. And at about the same time, we had a disruption in jet airways. So the supply
[Guest]: of planes, the supply of seats on planes was adversely affected.
[Amit Varma]: This is what economists would call a supply shock.
[Guest]: It was a supply shock. Now, the fundamental nature of the price system is that the price
[Guest]: moves to equate supply and demand. OK, so there is a market and that market is not clearing that
[Guest]: there are 100 people trying to buy seats, but there are only 80 seats. There's a mismatch that
[Guest]: doesn't work. How the price system deals with it is that prices go up until 20 guys walk away.
[Guest]: OK, so the price system rations out the limited seats that are available. So let's visualize that
[Guest]: there's a Bombay Delhi ticket, which was ordinarily some 7000 rupees. And now there's a shortage of
[Guest]: supply. So the price system. So let's just fix numbers. There are 100 people trying to buy seats
[Guest]: and there are only 80 available. So think of the price system as running an auction.
[Guest]: It says, no, instead of 7000, I'm going to go to 7500. Some people in the room drop out and they
[Guest]: say, OK, at 7500, I'm not going to fly. Does that get you to 20 people dropping out? If not, let's
[Guest]: go to 8000 rupees for the ticket and you keep raising the price until there are only 80 guys
[Guest]: left. OK, that's the imaginary anthropomorphized price system. That's what the price system does.
[Guest]: Now you go one deeper into that and you say, how much do you think I'd have to raise plane
[Guest]: tickets to get maybe 5% or 10% of the flyers to drop out? And you know what? Not a lot.
[Guest]: Because for many people in India, flying is a choice. You may choose to not fly. You may choose
[Guest]: to use a train. You may choose to use a Volvo bus. So many people are on that borderline. Flying is
[Guest]: not some critical, essential thing. It's still something that we have a discretionary expenditure
[Guest]: on flying. So my prediction would be that a relatively modest movement in the price
[Guest]: would work to clear supply and demand. And so it's not a big disruption. There's no great
[Guest]: change in prices that occurs. It's nice. There's a 5-10% move in the prices. That's great for the
[Guest]: profitability of Indigo and Go Air and SpiceJet and all that. This is the time they deserve to
[Guest]: make money. Once again, there are people who will call this profiteering. And I say, look,
[Guest]: this is the joy that these firms get in return for the long slog of fighting it out while Air
[Guest]: India was underpricing tickets and Jet Airways was there. And in those years, the other airlines
[Guest]: did badly. And this is the moment when you make money, because when the other guys exit is your
[Guest]: great opportunity to make money. We should not grudge them. This time, we should not be getting
[Guest]: angry at the fact that they are gouging customers or they are profiteering. This is markets. This is
[Guest]: the normal movement of the price system. If I may take an example from an unrelated industry,
[Guest]: let's consider wheat. Now, wheat is a very cheap grain and wheat is a staple. And most of us don't
[Guest]: even know the price of wheat that goes into the chapati that we eat, which means that if there
[Guest]: was a supply shock, so imagine there was a drought, there was a failure of the Rabi crop in Punjab and
[Guest]: Haryana. Now, there is a problem. There is not enough wheat. So if the price of wheat goes up
[Guest]: by 5% or 10%, it would not work to clear supply and demand. You would need a large movement in
[Guest]: the price of wheat to make people change their behavior, to shift away from wheat to eating rice,
[Guest]: to eating bajra, whatever. There would be adjustments. But for many people, you would
[Guest]: need a large movement in the price of wheat to elicit a change in behavior. And the term economists
[Amit Varma]: use for this is demand elasticity. So the demand elasticity of the wheat consumer is different to
[Guest]: the airline flyer. Exactly. So I was particularly comfortable at the prospect of a supply shock in
[Guest]: airlines, because our elementary intuition into the kind of behavior of flyers is that people are
[Guest]: highly sensitive to price. People are always conscious of what they're spending when they
[Guest]: buy a plane ticket. So you would expect a given supply disruption to get tidied over with a
[Guest]: relatively modest movement in the price. Whereas in something like wheat, you would get large
[Guest]: movements in the price. Once again, we shouldn't get angry about these movements. This is the
[Amit Varma]: price system. This is what prices do. And what a lot of people demand is that, you know, if the
[Amit Varma]: price of something, especially something essential goes too high, they say no, no, the government
[Amit Varma]: should control it. But, you know, I've had in I've had different episodes in price controls,
[Amit Varma]: including an Uber. So I'll just kind of illustrate that with an example of two things that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: letting the price adjust does one is let's say that there are 100 potential Uber customers at
[Amit Varma]: a given point in time who want a taxi, but there are only 50 taxis available. Now, if you fix the
[Amit Varma]: price, what happens is that is first come first serve, the first 50 people get it, the other 50
[Amit Varma]: are simply stranded. Now, you could be someone who has an urgent need, maybe you need to take your
[Amit Varma]: aging father to the hospital, maybe you need to catch a flight, you would be willing to pay much
[Amit Varma]: more, but you're stranded. And some of the people who happen to get the taxis, the lucky 50 could
[Amit Varma]: just be going out for an errand or you know, they could easily walk or take a bus or do something
[Amit Varma]: else is trivial, or they could just sit at home and watch Netflix. And they get it instead.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas if you allowed the price to adjust, two important things would happen. One is that it
[Amit Varma]: would be allocated depending on how desperately someone wanted it because a guy who has to go to
[Amit Varma]: the airport, the guy who has to take his dad to the hospital, they'd be willing to pay more.
[Amit Varma]: And someone whose need might be trivial, who can just you know, it's a five minute drive,
[Amit Varma]: he can take an auto or walk would do that. So the price system effectively sort of sorts those guys
[Amit Varma]: out. The second and the more important thing that it does, which even applies to airlines or
[Amit Varma]: anything is that it sends information, it sends information to idle Uber drivers that listen,
[Amit Varma]: there is a profit to be made. And for their self interest to get into the market to fulfill the
[Amit Varma]: needs of the guys who would otherwise be stranded. And this information on both ends to both the
[Amit Varma]: buyer and the seller so that they can adjust is something that I think is unintuitive and unseen.
[Amit Varma]: And people don't often get it that if you fix the price, you will have scarcity,
[Amit Varma]: it will be first come first serve. And a price system is beautiful, not just in the short term
[Amit Varma]: way of letting people get what they need based on their how urgent the requirement is, but also in a
[Amit Varma]: long term way of fixing that supply demand shortfall. So I want to talk about two things.
[Guest]: If I may do this in reverse order, I'll come to what you just said in a moment. So I'm very happy
[Guest]: you brought up Uber, because there is something fundamental and profound about the gig economy.
[Guest]: And it fits beautifully in our intuition about how markets work. There was a paper done by people at
[Guest]: the Center for Civil Society, which did some things that were quite interesting and an eye
[Guest]: opener to me personally. This was about Airbnb. And they found that one of the features of Airbnb
[Guest]: accommodations that users valued the most was a kitchenette. And it turns out that this is
[Guest]: something quite difficult to do within the normal government regulatory system. So the gig economy
[Guest]: is particularly good at discovering products and features in its own way that traditional
[Guest]: regulatory structures might fumble at. And I think that's an important lesson to all of us that
[Guest]: let that self-organizing system work and discover solutions as opposed to using regulation.
[Guest]: That said, there is a role for regulation. And let me talk about your example. So first,
[Guest]: I agree with everything you said, but now let me bring the cautionary note about the problem and
[Guest]: how we worry about it. The technical phrase we use in the field of the economics of public policy
[Guest]: is market failure. A market failure is a situation in which the self-organizing system,
[Guest]: the individual decentralized decisions by all of us does not work so well, where something goes
[Guest]: wrong. And there are four categories of market failures. And the first of them and the most
[Guest]: important of them in one way is a monopoly. So when there's market power, when somebody's a
[Guest]: monopolist, things don't work so well. The monopolist will gouge the consumer. The monopolist
[Guest]: will artificially depress production and will extract consumer surplus. So nobody likes a
[Guest]: monopoly. And in a way, a lot of what we do in public policy is designed to combat these
[Guest]: monopolies. Now, when you go back to the beginning of the taxi industry, which is now like 70, 80
[Guest]: years old all over the world, the situation that was on the mind of everybody was like this, that
[Guest]: there is one taxi cab on a street and you are one consumer on the street and you go up to the taxi
[Guest]: cab and say, will you go there? And the guy realizes that you're desperate and he's a monopoly
[Guest]: in that brief moment and he can basically charge anything. So the regulation of taxi fares came
[Guest]: out of that problem. That in that situation, the bargaining power is entirely asymmetric. And when
[Guest]: there is only one taxi cab on the pavement, that person gets the ability to charge almost anything.
[Amit Varma]: And also if I may interrupt, the problem in India is that the supply of those taxi cabs is also
[Amit Varma]: controlled by the government because there are only limited licenses they give out. So that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, furthers the scarcity.
[Guest]: Yeah. Same as the New York taxi cabs, which are artificially restricted.
[Guest]: Yeah. But I just want to focus on that point that there is market failure in this problem.
[Guest]: And that is why there is regulation of taxi cabs. Now, in the limit, the Uber surge pricing
[Guest]: can potentially collapse into that same problem. That in the central systems, Uber sees that many
[Guest]: customers are walking on a street with its app open. So Uber has a unique ability to see where
[Guest]: its users are. And it knows that on that street, there are only three taxi cabs. So you've got a
[Guest]: little monopoly. And now why not charge the moon for that? So everything you said is correct, that
[Guest]: the price will ration out the users and will allocate the scarce goods to the people who
[Guest]: want it the most. The high price will attract more consumers. But we do have a regulatory
[Guest]: problem, which is that it is perfectly feasible for Uber to turn into just a classic 19th century
[Guest]: fear of a monopolist. And I don't have an answer for how you would solve this problem. But I just
[Guest]: want to say that good economists do worry about Uber surge pricing as well. So I have like three
[Amit Varma]: responses to this. One is, of course, like, you know, when we see a market failure, we often think
[Amit Varma]: of the government has to step in. But I think as you know, public choice theory would tell you that
[Amit Varma]: government failure is far more endemic and in a sense, I would argue even inevitable because of
[Amit Varma]: the way the incentives are aligned. But leaving that broader point aside, you know, when you point
[Amit Varma]: out about, you know, your traditional Kali Pili taxi, how it's a monopoly for a moment when you
[Amit Varma]: want to go somewhere and he can charge whatever he wants. I don't know if I'd call it a market
[Amit Varma]: failure, because the reason that scarcity exists and that monopoly exists for the moment is because
[Amit Varma]: the state is interfering in the, you know, market entry.
[Guest]: Even if entry were open, there will always be these dumb luck situations,
[Guest]: where, so to use a London analogy, it starts raining. Then suddenly, there is a surge of users
[Guest]: of taxis, and there will be a street where there will be two, three taxis. And so there's always a
[Amit Varma]: little lag, the market takes time to adjust, would you call that a market failure per se,
[Guest]: it would be a market failure if it persists. So if there is a monopoly, where within hundreds of
[Guest]: meters of walking distance, I really am down to only one or two producers, and they can essentially
[Amit Varma]: charge me very high prices, I would call that market power. And my third point is that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the big issue with a monopoly, of course, is that they can charge high prices and expect
[Amit Varma]: consumers and so on. And competition keeps prices low and all of that. But a lot of the modern
[Amit Varma]: monopolies, monopolies, quote, unquote, that people tend to worry about, like an Amazon,
[Amit Varma]: like a Facebook, like even an Uber, are actually not doing that. You know, even if they control
[Amit Varma]: the market, you see that the prices are very low, and the consumers are benefiting massively,
[Guest]: like from Amazon, for example. Well, you have to be cautious about that.
[Guest]: There is a very plausible scenario that a firm like Amazon or a firm like Uber
[Guest]: becomes a monopoly at first with very low prices, drives off the competitors. Then after that,
[Guest]: you've got a network effect that the only game in town is Amazon or the only game in town is Uber,
[Guest]: and then they would raise prices. So we should look this gift cards in the mouth.
[Amit Varma]: But if that happens, surely then other entrants will come in.
[Guest]: By that time, some of these games will be locked up because their network effects. So
[Guest]: the key network effect in these platform economies, like Uber, is that if I'm a driver,
[Guest]: and I switch on the Uber app, I've got an order flow coming into that. And if I'm a customer,
[Guest]: and I open the Uber app, I will find more taxis. Once you've created this network effect,
[Guest]: then both sides tend to come to that platform because they don't have a choice.
[Guest]: And that platform can charge supernormal pricing. So there are genuine concerns about these
[Guest]: markets. I am not quick to say we know solutions. But I think we know enough to be concerned.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. I mean, as of now, I see Uber and Ola and even your, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Kalipili is playing outside and there's always video conferencing. So why do you even need to go
[Amit Varma]: anywhere? But I'm kidding. Right. So, so to kind of get back to one of the sort of interesting
[Amit Varma]: points you made is that if not for state interference, the different ways in which
[Amit Varma]: the state keeps zombie firms alive or zombie banks keep zombie firms alive, not just in the
[Amit Varma]: public sector, but the private sector. And in fact, I should ask you to elaborate on that,
[Amit Varma]: which I will. But one of the effects of that is that downturns are longer that if creative
[Amit Varma]: destruction is allowed, downturns would be much shorter and you give specific examples of that.
[Guest]: Can you take me through that? So that the great economist Karl Marx taught us that it is in the
[Guest]: nature of the market economy that there are booms and busts. Okay, so there are periods of exuberance
[Guest]: and a great deal of investment. And then the competition hots up and margins go down and
[Guest]: some firms get into trouble. We in India have lived this twice in the period after the early
[Guest]: nineties. So let me tell the grand Indian story. The grand Indian story is that in from 93, 94,
[Guest]: 95, 96, we had investment boom and a great deal of entry took place. So new firms were born,
[Guest]: new capacities were built. By 97, 98, 99, the world started becoming difficult and a lot of
[Guest]: firms got into trouble. Okay. And then we played that same story again, one more time. So in 2003,
[Guest]: four, five, six, seven, we had the most gigantic investment boom in India's history. And then from
[Guest]: 2011 onwards, we've been doing quite badly. Okay. And what's going on there is that there is a
[Guest]: surge of entry and then competition hots up. And then what? If you do not think about exit of
[Guest]: firms, if you do not think of firms closing down, firms getting sold, firms getting bought,
[Guest]: then that misery just drags on for more years. Okay. So what we see in our business cycle
[Guest]: research in India, so Radhika Pandey and Ela Patnaik and I have papers on measuring the
[Guest]: Indian business cycle. And we are struck by how these things take more time in India. And we've
[Guest]: often wondered what is going wrong. And when we compare with countries like the United States,
[Guest]: it seems to us that one difference is that when things go wrong in the United States,
[Guest]: they get rapidly cleaned up by the bankruptcy court. So people move fast. This isn't working,
[Guest]: you get into trouble, you're down on your payments. I would also underline one more
[Guest]: interesting feature here. All these things go faster when there is debt. Okay. So imagine I'm
[Guest]: an all equity firm. I'm 100% equity. Now I can sustain my own bad behavior for some time. But
[Guest]: when I have debt, I've got a Damocles sword on my head, I have to repay the debt. And when times
[Guest]: become tough, when I'm unable to produce the cash, then I will fail on one of my debt repayments.
[Guest]: And then you just want to go quickly, move it through the bankruptcy court, just go as quickly
[Guest]: as you can to the bankruptcy court. Either the firm will be closed down, or it'll be sold to
[Guest]: somebody else, very often an existing firm. So market power will develop that some of the
[Guest]: survivors will achieve a little more clout in the market, be able to get the price up a little.
[Guest]: And then profit rates will come back, investment will come back. So this whole cycle of life
[Guest]: is playing out slowly in India, because we are prolonging the business of firm exit.
[Amit Varma]: And how does the state contribute to that, for example, is, you know, the NPS problem
[Amit Varma]: linked to that in the sense that bank or banks often keep these zombie firms alive by making
[Amit Varma]: loans and then servicing those loans and keeping them alive and throwing good money after bad,
[Guest]: and that prolongs the process. So this is very much a problem with our banking regulation.
[Guest]: What should happen in banking regulation is, you see a borrower having distress,
[Guest]: you must rapidly mark down the value of that asset. Okay, so imagine you gave me a loan of 100,
[Guest]: you're supposed to be vigilant, you're the bank, you're supposed to be vigilant,
[Guest]: you're supposed to watch me and understand my early signs of distress. Very often,
[Guest]: you are my payments bank as well. So you're seeing my cash, you're seeing my revenues,
[Guest]: you very much know when my life is not going so well. And of course, there is beautiful
[Guest]: information in the accounting data, we can construct models of firm failure using the
[Guest]: accounting data. So put it together, it's not difficult for a bank to know when the
[Guest]: borrower is in trouble. Now the bank is supposed to make an estimate of what is the prospective
[Guest]: market value of that loan, that if you try to take your loan to me and sell it to somebody else,
[Guest]: what would that somebody else be willing to pay? What banking regulation has to do is to force
[Guest]: banks to recognize these losses. So if the fair value of the loan on the market is going to go
[Guest]: down from 100 to 60, then honestly, if I tried to sell this loan, the market would pay me 60,
[Guest]: then the bank should show that loss of 40 right now, because you've really lost that money.
[Guest]: And you should show it right now. Now, as you will expect, no bank employee wants to do that.
[Guest]: So that's what banking regulation is all about. Banking regulation is about forcing bank employees
[Guest]: to face up to the difficulties in their book and recognize these losses and take the losses
[Guest]: on the chin. Now, we haven't particularly done that. So RBI has long had a history of being kind
[Guest]: to banks, of being kind to the borrowers of banks. And so these things just slither on for years and
[Guest]: years. So in our calculations, we believe that if the Indian debt crisis and the banking crisis
[Guest]: had been dealt with in 2011, 2012, 2013, the cost of equity capital that was required inside Indian
[Guest]: banking would have been about 2-3 trillion rupees. Every year of delay has driven up that cost.
[Guest]: Today, it would cost 8 or 10 trillion rupees to fix all the banks. Because when you don't solve
[Guest]: these things, they just become more and more expensive because you have to put more money
[Guest]: after the old money. So these are the sorts of things where a society has to be organized
[Guest]: around a philosophy of the market economy. We need all of us to come to grips with these concepts
[Guest]: that when there is a loan, there will be a fairly tough bankruptcy code in it. And the bank will
[Guest]: recognize these losses fairly quickly and so on. When a bank doesn't work, we will close down a
[Guest]: bank. These are all the concepts of a market economy, the discipline, the rigor of a market economy.
[Guest]: And I think we're just at the early stages of learning how these institutional things work.
[Amit Varma]: And like you said, the incentive of a politician who's always fixed on the short term and always
[Amit Varma]: fixed on the next election will always be to kick the can down the road. You know, bureaucrats will
[Amit Varma]: have the same inclination. And even bankers, for example, will not want to take the, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there is policy paralysis when they're worried that okay, if I give a haircut on this loan,
[Amit Varma]: if I take a haircut on this loan, I could be accused of corruption. And all of those factors
[Guest]: and those different incentives. We need to solve some of these things. So for example,
[Guest]: a banker being held responsible when there is a markdown on the loan, we have to build
[Guest]: the institutions, the machinery to protect people to find ways of determining what is the size of
[Guest]: the damage and so on. But this is the puzzle that we face that how do we create a society where
[Guest]: there is creative destruction. All the things we talked about fit under that puzzle that we need to
[Guest]: get entrepreneurs and employees used to the idea that firms come and firms go. We need to get
[Guest]: banks used to the idea that they will mark down the losses that have occurred and that sometimes
[Guest]: banks will go bust. We need a banking regulation capacity that will hawkishly monitor banks and
[Guest]: make sure that they do these things correctly. And in return is this very big prize. And that
[Guest]: very big prize is that we will finish off with downturns quickly. And it seems to me like a very
[Guest]: big prize that it would be a truly great thing for a country that you go through a great investment
[Guest]: boom, then there is really tough competition within a short time, maybe one year, two years,
[Guest]: you work it out, and then you restart the next big boom. Whereas in India, these things slide
[Amit Varma]: down for many, many years. So, you know, before we end the episode, I'd also then like you to,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, elaborate on GST. You were obviously, as you mentioned, in the early days involved with
[Amit Varma]: designing the GST and what eventually got implemented by the Modi government is much more
[Amit Varma]: convoluted than people like you would have liked. And your case was that a good GST, a simple GST
[Amit Varma]: with one low tax with a good administrative structure would have helped kill off zombie
[Guest]: firms faster. Explain that process to me. What is happening in India is that we have too many
[Guest]: different rates. And it's become complicated, you could be an inefficient firm and take cover in
[Guest]: various clauses of the tax code, or you could take cover in tax evasion. So the sophisticated idea is
[Guest]: that the low productivity firms of India are hiding in violating regulations, in emitting
[Guest]: pollution when that should not be done, and in cheating on taxes. So the deep insight is that
[Guest]: if we are able to build a simple clean GST, again, my idea is very clear about 8-10% single rate on
[Guest]: single rate on everything, just a universal base, 8%, 10% on everything, a simple tax administration,
[Guest]: then a lot of the hassle is taken out. And the room for fudging around is taken out,
[Guest]: the room for discretion by the tax authorities taken out. And what that will do is it will
[Guest]: uncover the inefficient firms, the zombie firms, the low productivity firms that have been hiding
[Guest]: in the woodwork based on their ability to cheat on taxes. So big phenomenon we see in India is that
[Guest]: we see large, sophisticated, high technology firms often tend to have a high compliance culture.
[Guest]: They meet every pollution regulation, they meet every labour law, they meet every tax requirement.
[Guest]: And that's great. We want those kinds of firms to thrive. But those firms don't really make
[Guest]: the kind of profit margins they ought to, because they're competing with a low productivity firm
[Guest]: that manages to cheat on regulation, to cheat on pollution, to cheat on labour law, to cheat
[Guest]: on taxation. So that's the big idea about the connection between GST and zombie firms.
[Amit Varma]: And what you also pointed out was that before the GST came into play, and to some extent,
[Amit Varma]: maybe still now, is that you had taxation of transactions, which in public finance called
[Amit Varma]: bad taxes. And then what that forces companies to do is it creates an incentive towards vertical
[Amit Varma]: integration. The example you gave was that let's say if you are, you know, taxing, you know, when
[Amit Varma]: the engine of a car is made, and then when the car is put together, and if you're taxing them
[Amit Varma]: separately, then it's in a company's interest to bring it all in house in this vertical integration.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas economies advance, the more there is specialization. And, you know, not having not
[Amit Varma]: taxing each transaction separately, and a GST basically treats them all as one reduces the
[Amit Varma]: incentive for vertical integration, you have more specialization, and everybody benefits.
[Guest]: So this is the old Adam Smith idea, that we each of us specialize, and we get to doing something
[Guest]: very well. And that leads to a very nice intuition in a market economy, that a sophisticated economy
[Guest]: is one in which we transact more. Okay, so more turnover is the hallmark of a more sophisticated
[Guest]: economy. So we are arm's length firms, you are an engine producer, I am a car producer.
[Guest]: But we still do a lot of business with each other separately, because I'm buying
[Guest]: your engine. Whereas in a less sophisticated economy, we vertically integrate these things
[Guest]: into vertically integrated monoliths. And this is a less efficient way of organizing society.
[Guest]: So it's a very simple public finance idea that never tax transactions. A transaction tax is
[Guest]: always a bad tax. Because that way you are interfering with the very lifeblood of an
[Guest]: efficient society, which is many, many people doing many, many trades.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, to end the episode, a final question, you know, you've worked for a couple
[Amit Varma]: of decades now, you know, in public policy, you worked within government, you worked with the
[Amit Varma]: Ministry of Finance, do you see the thinking on this changing? Like, obviously, it's a good thing
[Amit Varma]: that JET was allowed to close down. But do you broadly see the thinking on this changing that
[Amit Varma]: we have a GST, even if it's not a perfect one? We have the IBC, even if it's not being implemented
[Guest]: perfectly? Do you see the mindset changing? I'm actually a little disappointed. So I started
[Guest]: out in India in 1993. And there was a lot of excitement about the market economy. And I felt
[Guest]: many people were very self consciously trying to understand what it means to live in a market
[Guest]: economy, and to adapt oneself and one's organisation into the concepts and frameworks of a
[Guest]: market economy. I think some of that intellectual construct has gone astray. And we are losing
[Guest]: sight of the foundations, we are losing a sense of the fundamentals. So I feel, in some ways,
[Guest]: we are less equipped in terms of the worldview and the framework today than we were in 1993.
[Guest]: And it's a bit of a disappointment that this hasn't quite gone as I had hoped it would go.
[Amit Varma]: This is a policy universe you're talking about?
[Guest]: This is the mind of all of us about how we think about markets, how we think about government,
[Guest]: how we think about the role of state.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting because 60% of India is born after liberalisation, right? So you would
[Amit Varma]: not expect these kind of reflexive worship of the state to sort of be there.
[Guest]: I think a reflexive socialism is alive and well.
[Amit Varma]: On that extremely hopeful note, Ajay, thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: My pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: Advertising is dead. Yep, you heard me right. Advertising is dead.
[Unknown]: We're all in the content business now. Let's not call it news, TV, radio, etc, etc. It's all content
[Unknown]: and we're in the middle of this weirdly exciting phase where all the borders and lines that have
[Unknown]: been drawn over decades has been swept away by this lovely thing called the internet.
[Unknown]: We're a show where we don't dwell on just the stuff that is now, but rather the wider stuff
[Unknown]: about advertising, media, content and the whole goddamn circus surrounding it.
[Unknown]: Tune in every Tuesday for a weekly unboxing of the mystery box we used to call advertising.
[Unknown]: I'm Varun Duggirala, co-founder and content chief at The Gritch, and this is my new podcast.
[Unknown]: Advertising is dead.